add key attestations (#389)
openid/OpenID4VCI: openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.md

* `jwt`: A JWT [@!RFC7519] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `jwt`, it MUST also contain a `jwt` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#jwt-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `jwt` proof type, it MUST include a `jwt` parameter with its value being an array of JWTs, where each JWT is formed as defined in (#jwt-proof-type).
* `ldp_vp`: A W3C Verifiable Presentation object signed using the Data Integrity Proof [@VC_Data_Integrity] as defined in [@VC_DATA_2.0] or [@VC_DATA] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `ldp_vp`, it MUST also contain an `ldp_vp` parameter that includes a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `ldp_vp` proof type, it MUST include an `ldp_vp` parameter with its value being an array of [W3C Verifiable Presentations](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0), where each of these W3C Verifiable Presentation is formed as defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type).

> * `attestation`:  A JWT [@!RFC7519] representing a key attestation without proof of possession is used. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `attestation`, it MUST also contain an `attestation` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#attestation-proof-type).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `attestation`:  A JWT [@!RFC7519] representing a key attestation without using a proof of possession of the cryptographic key material that is being attested. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `attestation`, the object MUST also contain an `attestation` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#attestation-proof-type).
```

> * `attestation`:  A JWT [@!RFC7519] representing a key attestation is used instead of a proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `attestation`, it MUST also contain an `attestation` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#attestation-proof-type).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `attestation`:  A JWT [@!RFC7519] representing a key attestation is used instead of a proof of possession of an individual cryptographic key material. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `attestation`, it MUST also contain an `attestation` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#attestation-proof-type).
```
attestation can contain proof of possession so `instead of a PoP` sounded a little off to me.

> * `attestation`:  A JWT [@!RFC7519] representing a key attestation is used instead of a proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `attestation`, it MUST also contain an `attestation` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#attestation-proof-type).

Author: ```suggestion
* `attestation`:  A JWT [@!RFC7519] representing a key attestation without proof of possession is used. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `attestation`, it MUST also contain an `attestation` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#attestation-proof-type).
```

  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `openid4vci-proof+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].
  * `kid`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing the key ID. If the Credential shall be bound to a DID, the `kid` refers to a DID URL which identifies a particular key in the DID Document that the Credential shall be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `jwk` is present.
  * `jwk`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing the key material the new Credential shall be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `kid` is present.

>   * `x5c`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing a certificate or certificate chain corresponding to the key used to sign the JWT. This element MAY be used to convey a key attestation. In such a case, the actual key certificate will contain attributes related to the key properties.

Reviewer: why is `x5c` being deleted? `key_attestation` parameter should be added in addition to `x5c`, not instead of it

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate what the x5c field would be used for if we use the `key_attestation` field for attestations? Or do you see this as just an alternative place for key attestations?

Reviewer: first of all, this is a `jwt` proof type section, so if a new proof type `attestation` is being defined, this section should stay unchanged. 

this is a place that does not define what is used with `key_attestation`, but what are the mechanisms that can be used in general, and right now it says, kid or jwk or x5c, so that should not change with this PR

Reviewer: ok, i read the rest of the text and am confused/concerned. key attestation is being added to jwt proof type (so key attestation per proof), but a new key attestation proof type is also being introduced (key attestation per multiple proofs). i think we should not add key attestation to jwt proof type if ther eis a new key attestation.

Author: I disagree and we had a different agreement last time

Author: we left x5c in now with a stripped down version not referencing to key attestation

  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `openid4vci-proof+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].
  * `kid`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing the key ID. If the Credential shall be bound to a DID, the `kid` refers to a DID URL which identifies a particular key in the DID Document that the Credential shall be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `jwk` is present.
  * `jwk`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing the key material the new Credential shall be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `kid` is present.

>   * `key_attestation`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing a key attestation as described in (#keyattestation).

Author: ```suggestion
* `x5c`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing a certificate or certificate chain corresponding to the key used to sign the JWT.
  * `key_attestation`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing a key attestation as described in (#keyattestation).
```

  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `openid4vci-proof+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].
  * `kid`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing the key ID. If the Credential shall be bound to a DID, the `kid` refers to a DID URL which identifies a particular key in the DID Document that the Credential shall be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `jwk` is present.
  * `jwk`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing the key material the new Credential shall be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `kid` is present.

> * `x5c`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing a certificate or certificate chain corresponding to the key used to sign the JWT.

Reviewer: sorry for going back to this... I still think it should be ok to use x5c chain as key attestation, since key attestation in `key_attestation` parameter is a JWT and does not have an option to put x5c in the header.

Reviewer: ah nvm, i missed https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/389/files#diff-1f424614b35a9899813079f1b1f6218631a2aedd993368ccb89bb81a9eda0289R2213

  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `openid4vci-proof+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].
  * `kid`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing the key ID. If the Credential shall be bound to a DID, the `kid` refers to a DID URL which identifies a particular key in the DID Document that the Credential shall be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `jwk` is present.
  * `jwk`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing the key material the new Credential shall be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `kid` is present.

> * `x5c`: OPTIONAL. JOSE Header containing a certificate or certificate chain corresponding to the key used to sign the JWT.

Reviewer 3: is the indent a bit off here, I cannot tell

Author: you are correct, thanks!

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

> If an `attestation` is provided and successfully validated by the Credential Issuer, it SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the attestation.

Reviewer 4: Why only SHOULD?

Author: I believe the Credential Issuer always has the freedom to issue less credentials than were requested by the Wallet. I may not want Issuer to return 1000 Credentials if he requests so, or?

Author: Editors Call:
- there is max_batch_size in the Issuer's metadata
- general opinion that SHOULD is fine

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

> If an `attestation` is provided and successfully validated by the Credential Issuer, it SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the attestation.

Reviewer 3: Is there a requirement that the key doing the signing of the proof must be an attested key from the set of `attested_keys`?

Asking because the spec defines `proof` as:

https://openid.net/specs/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0-14.html#section-7.2-2.3.1 
> Object providing a single proof of possession of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instance will be bound to...

definition of`proofs` then builds on top of that definition.

```json
{
  "typ": "openid4vci-proof+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": 0,

>   "key_attestation": [<key attestation in JWT format>]

Reviewer 2: This shouldn't be an array
```suggestion
  "key_attestation": <key attestation in JWT format>
```

Author: if people want a certificate chain, there is the option to include x5c

Reviewer: so that's an argument not to have an array, no, Paul?

Author: I take this as an agreement from you also @Sakurann :)

```json
{
  "typ": "openid4vci-proof+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",

>   "kid": 0,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  "kid": "0",
```

This header parameter is a string as per Section 4.1.4 of RFC 7515 https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7515.html#section-4.1.4

Reviewer 5: I do have a seperate question as to why we included this parameter in the header of this example, what purpose is it serving?

Author: I was merely fixing an incorrect example in the spec and "kid" is one of the options

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

> The Credential Issuer SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the attestation.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Credential Issuer SHOULD issue a Credential for each cryptographic public key specified in the `attested_keys` member within the `key_attestation` parameter.
```

> If an `attestation` is provided and successfully validated by the Credential Issuer, it SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the attestation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an `attestation` is provided, successfully validated by the Credential Issuer, and the JWT used as proof was signed by one of the attested keys, the Credential Issuer SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the attestation.
```

> If an `attestation` is provided, successfully validated by the Credential Issuer, and the JWT used as proof was signed by one of the attested keys, the Credential Issuer SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the attestation.

Reviewer 5: Could the guidance be more general here e.g

```suggestion
The Credential Issuer SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the attestation.
```

Im not sure we need to caveat the normative statement to only imply this is the behaviour when the attestation is validated and or signed by one of the attested keys do we? Or perhaps I'm missing something, is there a case where we cont intent to return a credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the attestation.

Reviewer 5: We could just remove this sentence as we restate the normative requirement here https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/389/files#diff-1f424614b35a9899813079f1b1f6218631a2aedd993368ccb89bb81a9eda0289R1011

Author: lgtm

```

#### `attestation` Proof Type {#attestation-proof-type}

A key attestation in JWT format as defined in (#keyattestation-jwt).

> When a key attestation is used as proof type, it MUST contain the `nonce` claim if a `c_nonce` was provided by the Credential Issuer and its value must be equal to the value of the server-provided `c_nonce`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a key attestation is used as a proof type, it MUST contain the `nonce` claim if a `c_nonce` was provided by the Credential Issuer.
```
second half of the sentence feels redundant.

> When a key attestation is used as proof type, it MUST contain the `nonce` claim if a `c_nonce` was provided by the Credential Issuer and its value must be equal to the value of the server-provided `c_nonce`.

Author: ```suggestion
When a key attestation is used as proof type, it MUST contain the `c_nonce` value provided by the Credential in its `nonce` parameter..
```

Below is a non-normative example of a `proof` parameter (with line breaks within values for display purposes only):

```json
{
  "proof_type": "attestation",

>   "attestation": "<TODO: generate proper example>"

Author: ```suggestion
  "attestation": "<key attestation in JWT format>"
```

```

#### `attestation` Proof Type {#attestation-proof-type}

A key attestation in JWT format as defined in (#keyattestation-jwt).

> When a key attestation is used as proof type, it MUST contain the `c_nonce` value provided by the Credential in its `nonce` parameter..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a key attestation is used as a proof type, it MUST contain the `c_nonce` value provided by the Credential in its `nonce` parameter.
```

Below is a non-normative example of a `proof` parameter (with line breaks within values for display purposes only):

```json
{
  "proof_type": "attestation",
  "attestation": "<key attestation in JWT format>"
}
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

The Credential Issuer SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the `attestation`.

```

Reviewer 7: Yeah, this look good, thanks!

```

#### `attestation` Proof Type {#attestation-proof-type}

A key attestation in JWT format as defined in (#keyattestation-jwt).

> When a key attestation is used as a proof type, it MUST contain the `c_nonce` value provided by the Credential in its `nonce` parameter.

Reviewer 8: A key attestation will be generated by the wallet provider and typically not by the wallet instance, right? If so, this requires interaction with the wallet provider when requesting credentials, without the possibility to obtain the attestation before hand.
This seems to introduce extra load and availability requirements on the wallet provider, as well as a slight loss of privacy by the wallet instance

Author: The tradeoff between `attestation` and `jwt` proof type:
- `attestation` must be done ad-hoc because the nonce is mandatory (if issues by wallet provider this includes a round-trip to the backend service) but does not require a proof of possession and therefore no user interaction
- `jwt` may include an key attestation (that may already be fetched) but requires proof of possession and therefore potentially user interaction (which may be bad for refresh/batch issuance)

Reviewer: @pmhsfelix for pre-obtained key attestations, you would use jwt proof type and put key attestation in the header. so that the freshness is guaranteed by nonce in the jwt proof type but key attestation can be generated beforehand.

@paulbastian bringing up description of what is key attestation and how there are two types of key attestation before jwt and key attestation proof types are described and then describe jwt/attestation proof types might help prevent this kind of confusion - I had exctly the same confusion as Pedro, initially.

Reviewer 9: I had the same confusion and I agree that explaining it earlier would really help! And adding @paulbastian's comment as spec text would help as well.

Reviewer 8: I may be still missing something. Just to confirm: 
`attestation` proof-type 
- requires `nonce`, therefore needs to be built just-in-time for the credential request?
- requires interaction with the wallet provider to be build?
If so, this requires interaction with the wallet provider just immediately before credential request, right?
If not, what am I missing?

```

#### `attestation` Proof Type {#attestation-proof-type}

A key attestation in JWT format as defined in (#keyattestation-jwt).

When a key attestation is used as a proof type, it MUST contain the `c_nonce` value provided by the Credential in its `nonce` parameter.

Below is a non-normative example of a `proof` parameter (with line breaks within values for display purposes only):

```json
{
  "proof_type": "attestation",
  "attestation": "<key attestation in JWT format>"
}
```

> The Credential Issuer SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the `attestation`.

Reviewer 4: Why only SHOULD?

Reviewer 2: There might be cases where it seems unreasonable to do so - for example if the wallet is providing 200 key attestations.

To be fair this doesn't really seem to be a problem with the attestation itself, but to the best of my knowledge, we do not have any normative language in VCI right now that the Issuer MUST answer a request with all requested credentials. I guess it would make sense to create an issue to discuss this and then fix the language in credential response and proof types?

```

#### `attestation` Proof Type {#attestation-proof-type}

A key attestation in JWT format as defined in (#keyattestation-jwt).

> When a key attestation is used as a proof type, it MUST contain the `c_nonce` value provided by the Credential in its `nonce` parameter.

Reviewer 3: is a word missing here, or am I missing something?

```suggestion
When a key attestation is used as a proof type, it MUST contain the `c_nonce` value provided by the Credential Issuer in its `nonce` parameter.
```

```json
{
  "typ": "openid4vci-proof+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",

>   "x5c": [<key certificate + certificate chain for attestation>]

Reviewer: issue #417

```

#### `attestation` Proof Type {#attestation-proof-type}

A key attestation in JWT format as defined in (#keyattestation-jwt).

When a key attestation is used as a proof type, it MUST contain the `c_nonce` value provided by the Credential Issuer in its `nonce` parameter.

Below is a non-normative example of a `proof` parameter (with line breaks within values for display purposes only):

```json
{
  "proof_type": "attestation",
  "attestation": "<key attestation in JWT format>"
}
```

> The Credential Issuer SHOULD return a Credential for each of the keys provided in the `attested_keys` claim of the `attestation`.

Reviewer 6: duplicated here:

https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/389/files#r1841798940

Author: ```suggestion
The Credential Issuer SHOULD issue a Credential for each cryptographic public key specified in the `attested_keys` claim within the `key_attestation` parameter.
```

  * `credential_signing_alg_values_supported`: OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that identify the algorithms that the Issuer uses to sign the issued Credential. Algorithm names used are determined by the Credential Format and are defined in (#format-profiles).
  * `proof_types_supported`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes specifics of the key proof(s) that the Credential Issuer supports. This object contains a list of name/value pairs, where each name is a unique identifier of the supported proof type(s). Valid values are defined in (#proof-types), other values MAY be used. This identifier is also used by the Wallet in the Credential Request as defined in (#credential-request). The value in the name/value pair is an object that contains metadata about the key proof and contains the following parameters defined by this specification:
    * `proof_signing_alg_values_supported`: REQUIRED. Array of case sensitive strings that identify the algorithms that the Issuer supports for this proof type. The Wallet uses one of them to sign the proof. Algorithm names used are determined by the key proof type and are defined in (#proof-types).

>     * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent. If no `length` or `description` is given, this object may be empty, indicating that a key attestation without further constraints is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent. If neither of the `key_type`, `user_authentication` and `apr` parameters are present, this object may be empty, indicating that a key attestation without further constraints is required.
```
think there is a copy paste error?

  * `credential_signing_alg_values_supported`: OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that identify the algorithms that the Issuer uses to sign the issued Credential. Algorithm names used are determined by the Credential Format and are defined in (#format-profiles).
  * `proof_types_supported`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes specifics of the key proof(s) that the Credential Issuer supports. This object contains a list of name/value pairs, where each name is a unique identifier of the supported proof type(s). Valid values are defined in (#proof-types), other values MAY be used. This identifier is also used by the Wallet in the Credential Request as defined in (#credential-request). The value in the name/value pair is an object that contains metadata about the key proof and contains the following parameters defined by this specification:
    * `proof_signing_alg_values_supported`: REQUIRED. Array of case sensitive strings that identify the algorithms that the Issuer supports for this proof type. The Wallet uses one of them to sign the proof. Algorithm names used are determined by the key proof type and are defined in (#proof-types).

>     * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent. If neither of the `key_type`, `user_authentication` and `apr` parameters are present, this object may be empty, indicating that a key attestation without further constraints is required.

Author: ```suggestion
    * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent. If neither of the `key_storage_type`, `user_authentication` and `apr` parameters are present, this object may be empty, indicating that a key attestation without further constraints is required.
```

      * `key_storage_type`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-keytypes) accepted by the Credential Issuer.
      * `user_authentication`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-keytypes) accepted by the Credential Issuer.

>       * `apr`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-apr) accepted by the Credential Issuer.

Reviewer: feedback from a Funke team: it would be much more actionable if this information is communicated per credential type, and not in general, so "i need HSM for PID, but for diploma strongbox is ok" as opposed to "I am ok with HSM or strongbox"

Reviewer: to do that, we need to a parameter like `key_types` in `credential_configuration_id` object, which we do not have now and maybe remove current issuer metadata parameters

  * `credential_signing_alg_values_supported`: OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that identify the algorithms that the Issuer uses to sign the issued Credential. Algorithm names used are determined by the Credential Format and are defined in (#format-profiles).
  * `proof_types_supported`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes specifics of the key proof(s) that the Credential Issuer supports. This object contains a list of name/value pairs, where each name is a unique identifier of the supported proof type(s). Valid values are defined in (#proof-types), other values MAY be used. This identifier is also used by the Wallet in the Credential Request as defined in (#credential-request). The value in the name/value pair is an object that contains metadata about the key proof and contains the following parameters defined by this specification:
    * `proof_signing_alg_values_supported`: REQUIRED. Array of case sensitive strings that identify the algorithms that the Issuer supports for this proof type. The Wallet uses one of them to sign the proof. Algorithm names used are determined by the key proof type and are defined in (#proof-types).

>     * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent. If neither of the `key_storage_type`, `user_authentication` and `apr` parameters are present, this object may be empty, indicating that a key attestation without further constraints is required.
>       * `key_storage_type`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-keytypes) accepted by the Credential Issuer.
>       * `user_authentication`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-keytypes) accepted by the Credential Issuer.
>       * `apr`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-apr) accepted by the Credential Issuer.

Reviewer 2: `apr` was not removed here and the references are not matching the new section
```suggestion
    * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent. If neither of the `key_storage_type` and `user_authentication` parameters are present, this object may be empty, indicating that a key attestation without further constraints is required.
      * `key_storage_type`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-apr) accepted by the Credential Issuer.
      * `user_authentication`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-apr) accepted by the Credential Issuer.
```

  * `credential_signing_alg_values_supported`: OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that identify the algorithms that the Issuer uses to sign the issued Credential. Algorithm names used are determined by the Credential Format and are defined in (#format-profiles).
  * `proof_types_supported`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes specifics of the key proof(s) that the Credential Issuer supports. This object contains a list of name/value pairs, where each name is a unique identifier of the supported proof type(s). Valid values are defined in (#proof-types), other values MAY be used. This identifier is also used by the Wallet in the Credential Request as defined in (#credential-request). The value in the name/value pair is an object that contains metadata about the key proof and contains the following parameters defined by this specification:
    * `proof_signing_alg_values_supported`: REQUIRED. Array of case sensitive strings that identify the algorithms that the Issuer supports for this proof type. The Wallet uses one of them to sign the proof. Algorithm names used are determined by the key proof type and are defined in (#proof-types).

>     * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent. If neither of the `key_storage_type` and `user_authentication` parameters are present, this object may be empty, indicating that a key attestation without further constraints is required.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not require a key attestation, this parameter MUST NOT be present in the metadata. If both `key_storage_type` and `user_authentication` parameters are missing, the key_attestations_required parameter may be empty, indicating a key attestation is needed without additional constraints.
```

>     * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not require a key attestation, this parameter MUST NOT be present in the metadata. If both `key_storage_type` and `user_authentication` parameters are absent, the `key_attestations_required` parameter may be empty, indicating a key attestation is needed without additional constraints.

Author: ```suggestion
    * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not require a key attestation, this parameter MUST NOT be present in the metadata. If both `key_storage` and `user_authentication` parameters are absent, the `key_attestations_required` parameter may be empty, indicating a key attestation is needed without additional constraints.
```

    * `proof_signing_alg_values_supported`: REQUIRED. Array of case sensitive strings that identify the algorithms that the Issuer supports for this proof type. The Wallet uses one of them to sign the proof. Algorithm names used are determined by the key proof type and are defined in (#proof-types).
    * `key_attestations_required`: OPTIONAL. Object that describes the requirement for key attestations as described in (#keyattestation), which the Credential Issuer expects the Wallet to send within the proof of the Credential Request. If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent. If neither of the `key_storage_type`, `user_authentication` and `apr` parameters are present, this object may be empty, indicating that a key attestation without further constraints is required.
      * `key_storage_type`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-keytypes) accepted by the Credential Issuer.

>       * `user_authentication`: OPTIONAL. Array defining values specified in (#keyattestation-keytypes) accepted by the Credential Issuer.

Reviewer: would like to see change in this structure so mapping between key_type and user_authn can be communicated?

Author: I don't think its worth it. Our focus is on `apr` and LoAs anyway

The following mechanisms in concert can be utilized to fulfill those objectives:

> **Key attestation** is a mechanism where the key storage component or Wallet Provider asserts the keys and their security policy. The Wallet MAY provide this data in the Credential Request to allow the Credential Issuer to validate the key management policy. This requires the Credential Issuer to rely on the trust anchor of the key attestation and the respective key management policy. While some existing platforms have key attestation formats, this specification introduces a common key attestation format that may be used by Credential Issuers for improved interoperability, see [](#keyattestation).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
**Key attestation** is a mechanism where the key storage component or Wallet Provider asserts the cryptographic public keys and their security policy. The Wallet MAY provide this data in the Credential Request to allow the Credential Issuer to validate the cryptographic key management policy. This requires the Credential Issuer to rely on the trust anchor of the key attestation and the respective key management policy. While some existing platforms have key attestation formats, this specification introduces a common key attestation format that may be used by Credential Issuers for improved interoperability, see [](#keyattestation).
```

The following mechanisms in concert can be utilized to fulfill those objectives:

> **Key attestation** is a mechanism where the key storage component or Wallet Provider asserts the keys and their security policy. The Wallet can provide this data in the Credential Request to allow the Credential Issuer to validate the key management policy. This requires the Credential Issuer to rely on the trust anchor of the key attestation and the respective key management policy. While some existing platforms have key attestation formats, this specification introduces a common key attestation format that may be used by Credential Issuers for improved interoperability, see [](#keyattestation).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
**Key attestation** is a mechanism where the key storage component or Wallet Provider asserts the keys and their security policy. The Wallet MAY provide this data in the Credential Request to allow the Credential Issuer to validate the key management policy. This requires the Credential Issuer to rely on the trust anchor of the key attestation and the respective key management policy. While some existing platforms have key attestation formats, this specification introduces a common key attestation format that may be used by Credential Issuers for improved interoperability, see [](#keyattestation).
```

## Proof replay {#key-proof-replay}

> If an adversary obtains a key proof (as outlined in #proof-types), they could potentially have a Credential issued that is linked to a key pair controlled by the victim. The `c_nonce` parameter serves as the main defense against replay attacks involving key proofs. It is RECOMMENDED that Credential Issuers utilize the Nonce Endpoint as specified in [](nonce-endpoint). A Wallet can continue using a given nonce until it either expires or is rejected by the Credential Issuer. The Credential Issuer can determine how frequently a particular nonce can be used. Servers MUST establish a clear policy on whether the same key proof can be reused and for how long, or if each Credential Request requires a new key proof.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If an adversary obtains a key proof (as outlined in #proof-types), they could potentially have a Credential issued that is linked to a key pair controlled by the victim. The `c_nonce` parameter serves as the main defense against replay attacks involving key proofs. It is RECOMMENDED that Credential Issuers utilize the Nonce Endpoint as specified in [](nonce-endpoint). A Wallet MAY continue using a given nonce until it either expires or is rejected by the Credential Issuer, or request a new one. The Credential Issuer determines how frequently a particular nonce can be used. Servers MUST establish a clear policy on whether the same key proof can be reused and for how long, or if each Credential Request requires a new key proof.
```

Reviewer 6: `Servers MUST establish a clear policy on whether the same key proof can be reused and for how long, or if each Credential Request requires a new key proof.`

how it sould be achieved? Do we need a metadata parameter to inform the parts about this?

Author: This is not my text but taken over, but I agree this text is not very clear.

Author: @Sakurann how to deal with Giuseppe's point?

Reviewer 6: moved MUST to SHOULD to relax the weight of expectations

Reviewer: we should not make changes to normative statements like MUST -> SHOULD at this point of this PR, especially in places that are not relevant to this PR.

```suggestion
If an adversary obtains a key proof (as outlined in #proof-types), they could potentially have a Credential issued that is linked to a key pair controlled by the victim. The `c_nonce` parameter serves as the main defense against replay attacks involving key proofs. It is RECOMMENDED that Credential Issuers utilize the Nonce Endpoint as specified in [](nonce-endpoint). A Wallet can continue using a given nonce until it either expires or is rejected by the Credential Issuer. The Credential Issuer determines how frequently a particular nonce can be used. Servers MUST establish a clear policy on whether the same key proof can be reused and for how long, or if each Credential Request requires a new key proof.
```

## Proof replay {#key-proof-replay}

> If an adversary is able to obtain a key proof, as defined in (#proof-types), the adversary could get a Credential issued that is bound to a key pair controlled by the victim. The `c_nonce` parameter is the primary countermeasure against key proof replay. Credential Issuers are RECOMMENDED to use the Nonce Endpoint as defined in [](nonce-endpoint). A Wallet can keep using a provided nonce until it expires or until the Credential Issuer refuses a nonce. The Credential Issuer may decide how often a certain nonce can be used. Servers MUST have a clear policy on whether the same key proof can be presented multiple times and for how long, or whether each Credential Request MUST have a fresh key proof.

Author: lgtm

> If an adversary is able to obtain a key proof, as defined in (#proof-types), the adversary could get a Credential issued that is bound to a key pair controlled by the victim. The `c_nonce` parameter is the primary countermeasure against key proof replay. Credential Issuers are RECOMMENDED to use the Nonce Endpoint as defined in [](nonce-endpoint). A Wallet can keep using a provided nonce until it expires or until the Credential Issuer refuses a nonce. The Credential Issuer may decide how often a certain nonce can be used. Servers MUST have a clear policy on whether the same key proof can be presented multiple times and for how long, or whether each Credential Request MUST have a fresh key proof.

Reviewer 2: I would change "it" to "they" in the first sentence of @peppelinux suggestion:
```suggestion
If an adversary obtains a key proof (as outlined in #proof-types), they could potentially have a Credential issued that is linked to a key pair controlled by the victim. The `c_nonce` parameter serves as the main defense against replay attacks involving key proofs. It is RECOMMENDED that Credential Issuers utilize the Nonce Endpoint as specified in [](nonce-endpoint). A Wallet can continue using a given nonce until it either expires or is rejected by the Credential Issuer. The Credential Issuer can determine how frequently a particular nonce can be used. Servers MUST establish a clear policy on whether the same key proof can be reused and for how long, or if each Credential Request requires a new key proof.
```

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

> A key attestation is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations.

Reviewer: we already have a definition of a key attestation here. could we simply point there? https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#section-12.1-4

> A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, which can result from the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. An Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, based on the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. An Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.
```

Author: I would not limit this only to Credential Request, maybe we need it for other things, e.g. dpop. But we could say "e.g. keys sent in the Credential Request"

> A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, which can result from the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. An Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.

Reviewer: what is the mechanism an issuer uses to communicate key attestation requirement in the issuer metadata..?

Author: I would add the metadata to this PR, okay?

Author: metadata is added

> Since the key attestations may have large audience as many Credential Issuers that not necessarly uses the same trust framework or internal design decisions, it is required to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format,allowing Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats makes easy for Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions, they also facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.

Reviewer: I think the text can be more explicit about that the comparison here is with using platform specific key attestations (google/apple).

Author: add text for Android KeyMaster attestations

todo: explain usage of this within proof type or DPoP Proof

## Key Attestation in JWT format

The JWT is signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself and contains the following elements:

* in the JOSE header,
  * `alg`: REQUIRED. A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry [@IANA.JOSE.ALGS]. It MUST NOT be `none` or an identifier for a symmetric algorithm (MAC).
  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `openid4vci-keyattestation+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].

> The key attestation may use `x5c`, `kid`, `trust_chain` or other mechanisms to convey the public key and the associated trust mechanism to sign the key attestation.

Reviewer: maybe point to the definitions of these parameters in `jwt` proof type section https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#section-7.2.1.1

Author: I think the given text is fine as-is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key attestation may use `x5c`, `kid` or `trust_chain` (as defined in (#jwt-proof-type) ) to convey the public key and the associated trust mechanism to sign the key attestation.
```
why are we allowing other mechanisms?

* in the JWT body,
  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `exp`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation expires using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].

>   * `keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].

Reviewer 10: This is just a detail, but how about calling the `keys` `attested_keys` ? I think this would make it perfectly clear what this parameter is.

Author: ```suggestion
  * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].
```

>   * `keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].

Author: ```suggestion
  * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].
```

>   * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].

Author: ```suggestion
  * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys from the same key storage component using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].
```

>   * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the key storage component and its security mechanism of attested keys from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).

Author: ```suggestion
  * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the key storage component and its security mechanism of attested keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).
```

  * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the security mechanism the key storage component uses to authenticate the End-User to authorize access to the private key from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).

>   * `apr` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the resistance to a certain attack potential as described

Author: ```suggestion
  * `apr` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the resistance to a specified attack potential. The value contains an URL that identifies the given attack potential.
```

  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to proof that a key attestation was freshly generated.
  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [status list]

> 

Reviewer 10: I suggest to also add an optional parameter that represents the key lifetime (like maximum duration for example). The Wallet solution provider might have reasons to enforce extra constraints and therefore he would need to specify to the Issuer to reduce the initially forseen validity of the EAA.

Author: My intention was to cover this with `exp`, do you think we need something additional or make the definition of `exp` more clearly?

Reviewer 10: The current definition indicates that `exp` represents the expiration of the key attestation, which for me would be around an hour or so. I was thinking about something like `max_key_lifetime`, which is something that takes into account for example the key size and algorithm and estimates for how long the key will be considered as resistant (e.g. 3 years, 5 years, etc).

Author: What would be the benefit of the key attestation having a different expiration time? Where would this 1 hour be used?

Reviewer 10: For me, having a short key attestation duration, like an hour indicates to the Issuer that he has a limited period of time within which he has to generate the EAA. The way I see it, it's more aligned with the request lifespan.
Which brings me to another question: do all the keys in the keys array have the same type? If not, it would make no sense to have one `max_key_lifetime` for all of them.

Author: My assumption was that all keys belong to the same WSCD/key storage component, I made a proposal to clarify that

Author: I still don't understand the usefulness of having 2 expiration times. Is there an attack scenario that you want to protect against? If the key is valid for 3-5 years, then this shouldn't change within one hour? If the Issuer wants replay protection then he should
a) provide a nonce that should we included to the key attestation
b) require a proof of possession with the key, like in credential request jwt proof type

Reviewer: i think it is sufficient to clarify that exp claim applies to both key attestation and the keys they attesting - made the suggestion above.

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

This is an example of a Key Attestation:

```json
{

>   "typ": "openid4vci-keyattestation+jwt",

Author: ```suggestion
  "typ": "keyattestation+jwt",
```

  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": "1"
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_type": "strong_box",
  "user_authentication": "system_pin",
  "apr" : "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high",

>   "keys": [

Author: ```suggestion
  "attested_keys": [
```

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

> A key attestation is an interoperable mechanism to proof the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys may be stored in various key storage components, that differ regarding the private key's protection against extraction and duplication as well as the user's authentication to unlock key operations. Key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based and may be on the same device as the wallet, external security tokens or remote services that enable cryptographic key operations.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A key attestation is an interoperable mechanism that provides evidence of the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations.
```

Reviewer 6: even if key attestation is an attestation that we use to define as a verifiable statement/artifact and so on. While here we're saying that an attestation is a mechanism, a sort of operation.

> A Wallet may provide key attestations to inform the Issuer about the properties of the provided keys. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate key attestations to decide whether keys are eligible to its own security requirements, which can results from regulatory requirements and laws or internal design decisions. An Issuer SHOULD communicate his requirements through his metadata or out-of-band.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, which can result from the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. An Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.
```

> todo: motivate interoperability for issuers

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Since the key attestations may have large audience as many Credential Issuers that not necessarly uses the same trust framework or internal design decisions, it is required to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format,allowing Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats makes easy for Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions, they also facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.
```

The key attestation may use `x5c`, `kid`, `trust_chain` or other mechanisms to convey the public key and the associated trust mechanism to sign the key attestation.

* in the JWT body,
  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `exp`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation expires using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].
  * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the key storage component and its security mechanism of attested keys from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).
  * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the security mechanism the key storage component uses to authenticate the End-User to authorize access to the private key from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).
  * `apr` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the resistance to a certain attack potential as described

>   * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to proof that a key attestation was freshly generated.
> 
> todo: add optional `status` parameter

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to proof that a key attestation was freshly generated.
  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [status list]
```

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

> This is an example of a Wallet Instance Attestation:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This is an example of a Wallet Attestation:
```

we need to take a final decision if call it Wallet Instance Attestation or Wallet Attestation alone. I have the same problem when I write a spec.

We also need a specification for the standardization of the wallet attestation, we have other similar non-normative examples in the oauth attestation based client authentication

Author: Ouch, I don't even understand why I wrote WIA here, WIA is supposed to be different artifact from key attestations that would relate to eIDAS WTE/ITE

Author: ```suggestion
This is an example of a Key Attestation:
```

```json
{
  "typ": "openid4vci-keyattestation+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": "1"
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",

>   "iat": 1516247022,

Reviewer 6: it seems to me that we definitively, deliberately, have decided to not include  `sub` anymore for these kind of attestations

Author: yes, I think for a key attestation it makes less sense, at least to use client_id as sub, because the key attestation is about a key storage component, or WSCD as eIDAS calls it.

Reviewer 6: really appreciated

  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_type": "strong_box",
  "user_authentication": "system_pin",
  "apr" : "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high",
  "keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",
      "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Key Types {#keyattestation-keytypes}

This specification defines the following values for `key_type`:

* `software`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses software-based key management.
* `tee`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Trusted Execution Environment for key management.
* `secure_enclave`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Secure Enclave for key management.
* `strong_box`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Strongbox for key management.
* `secure_element`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses a Secure Element for key management.
* `hsm`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM).

## User Authentication Types {#keyattestation-auth}

This specification defines the following values for `user_authentication`:

> * `system_biometry`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the mobile operating system using a biometric factor.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* `system_biometry`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the operating system using a biometric factor, such as the one provided by mobile devices.
```

I make this suggestion because nothing prevents to have a wallet installed on a laptop or provided via Cloud, while biometry should not necessarly depend by mobile device manufacturers

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

A key attestation is an interoperable mechanism to proof the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys may be stored in various key storage components, that differ regarding the private key's protection against extraction and duplication as well as the user's authentication to unlock key operations. Key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based and may be on the same device as the wallet, external security tokens or remote services that enable cryptographic key operations.

A Wallet may provide key attestations to inform the Issuer about the properties of the provided keys. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate key attestations to decide whether keys are eligible to its own security requirements, which can results from regulatory requirements and laws or internal design decisions. An Issuer SHOULD communicate his requirements through his metadata or out-of-band.

> 

Reviewer: please also take a look here: https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#section-12.1-4

> 

Author: I would make the security consideration on key attestation link to this section then instead?

> 

Reviewer: i think leaving this text here and updating and simplifying key attestation text in the security considerations (that also points to this section) might be clean?

  * `apr` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the resistance to a certain attack potential as described
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to proof that a key attestation was freshly generated.

todo: add optional `status` parameter

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

This is an example of a Wallet Instance Attestation:

```json
{
  "typ": "openid4vci-keyattestation+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": "1"
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_type": "strong_box",
  "user_authentication": "system_pin",
  "apr" : "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high",
  "keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",
      "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Key Types {#keyattestation-keytypes}

This specification defines the following values for `key_type`:

> * `software`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses software-based key management.
> * `hardware`: It MUST be used when the wallet uses hardware-based key management.

Author: ```suggestion
* `software`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses software-based key management.
```

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

> A key attestation is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations.

Author: ```suggestion
A key attestation is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are signed objects issued by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself.
```

  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_type": "strong_box",
  "user_authentication": "system_pin",
  "apr" : "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high",
  "attested_keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",
      "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Key Types {#keyattestation-keytypes}

This specification defines the following values for `key_type`:

* `software`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses software-based key management.
* `tee`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Trusted Execution Environment for key management.
* `secure_enclave`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Secure Enclave for key management.
* `strong_box`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Strongbox for key management.
* `secure_element`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses a Secure Element for key management.
* `hsm`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM).

## User Authentication Types {#keyattestation-auth}

This specification defines the following values for `user_authentication`:

> * `system_biometry`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the operating system using a biometric factor, such as the one provided by mobile devices.
> * `system_pin`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the mobile operating system using personal identification number (PIN).
> * `internal_biometry`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the Wallet using a biometric factor.
> * `internal_pin`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the Wallet using PIN.
> * `secure_element_pin` It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the secure element managing the key itself using PIN.

Reviewer 2: system = you authenticate with the system and the system takes care of secure communication with the  key storage
internal = you authenticate with the key storage directly

This should give the issuer everything they need combined with the key types describing where that storage is
```suggestion
* `system_biometry`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the operating system using a biometric factor, such as the one provided by mobile devices.
* `system_pin`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the mobile operating system using personal identification number (PIN).
* `internal_biometry`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the key storage directly using a biometric factor.
* `internal_pin`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized  by the key storage directly using a PIN.

```

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

> A key attestation is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself.

Reviewer: If you would like to keep this text here. please remove/simplify the text in https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#section-12.1-4. Having both seems confusing.

> A key attestation is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself.
```
I think there needs to be a differentiation between key attestation defined by this specification and platform provided key attestations - people seem to be confusing the two.

Author: I think the last sentence isn't true, as the Wallet Provider itself may provide the keys

Author: todo: improve text to include both examples for WP

A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys, e.g. for proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, based on the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. An Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Since the key attestations may have large audience as many Credential Issuers that not necessarly uses the same trust framework or internal design decisions, it is required to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format,allowing Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats makes easy for Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions, they also facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.

```

There are two flows how key attestations can be used within Credential issuance:
- The Wallet uses the `jwt` proof type in the Credential Request to create a proof of possession of the key and adds the key attestation in the JOSE header as specified in (#jwt-proof-type).

> - The Wallet uses the `attestation` proof type in the Credential Request with the key attestation without a proof of possession of the key itself as specified in (#attestation-proof-type).

Reviewer: umm... I don't think this really reflects what we discussed in the WG: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/389#issuecomment-2386849999

I think key attestation proof type should be adjusted to both options documented in the comment above, to support both key attestation proof type with nonce in key attestation and key attestation proof type with nonce in PoP. and key attestation in jwt proof type being removed.

because if we go the current path. an option to do key attestation without a nonce is only limited to key attestation per Proof, right? because i don't think jwt proof type has been extended to include more than one key.

Author: That's incorrect, `jwt` proof type allows multiple keys: https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#section-8.2-2.4

Reviewer: so this was already resolved by tue WG call. my confusion was coming from the fact that it was not clear that adding key attestation to jwt proof type allows to attest for multiple keys.

The latter may avoid unnecessary user interaction during the Credential issuance, as the key itself is not performing a signature operation.

> Since the key attestations may have large audience as many Credential Issuers that not necessarly uses the same trust framework or internal design decisions, it is required to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format,allowing Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats makes easy for Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions, they also facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.

Author: I can move it one paragraph up :+1:

## Key Attestation in JWT format {#keyattestation-jwt}

The JWT is signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself and contains the following elements:

* in the JOSE header,
  * `alg`: REQUIRED. A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry [@IANA.JOSE.ALGS]. It MUST NOT be `none` or an identifier for a symmetric algorithm (MAC).
  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `keyattestation+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].

The key attestation may use `x5c`, `kid`, `trust_chain` or other mechanisms to convey the public key and the associated trust mechanism to sign the key attestation.

* in the JWT body,
  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].

>   * `exp`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation expires using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `exp`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation and the key(s) it is attesting expire, using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
```

>   * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys from the same key storage component using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].

Reviewer 7: Actually prototyping an implementation of this. If there are multiple keys, do we create multiple credentials? Can this be made clear in the spec one way or another?

Author: we will improve the text in the proof types section on this. Which of these scenarios are you looking into: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/389#issuecomment-2405477640 ?

Author: please check https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/389/files#r1797063233
however, it seems currently underspecified in general in OpenID4VCI that the amount of keys in the request maps to the credentials array in the response.

  * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the key storage component and its security mechanism of attested keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).

>   * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the security mechanism the key storage component uses to authenticate the End-User to authorize access to the private key from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).

Reviewer 11: We might want to consider combinations (as provided by mobile operating systems). This allows for better UX in certain situations (similar to Apple/Google/Samsung Pay allowing to fall-back from to biometry to device pin). Examples:  

- **Biometry **OR** PIN**: `.biometryAny` OR `.devicePin` on iOS, `AUTH_BIOMETRIC_STRONG` OR `AUTH_DEVICE_CREDENTIAL` on Android
- **Biometry **AND** PIN**: When using a (Cloud) HSM, the user might need to use biometry to access the key in the TEE/SecureEnclave and then a PIN for the HSM.

Author: We could make user_authentication an array making all included entries a logical OR. BiometryAndPin would need to be a separate value though

Author: todo: model user_authentication as an array

Author: ```suggestion
  * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that asserts the security mechanisms the key storage component allows to authenticate the End-User to authorize access to the private key from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).
```

This is an example of a Key Attestation:

```json
{
  "typ": "keyattestation+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": "1"
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_type": "strong_box",
  "user_authentication": "system_pin",
  "apr" : "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high",
  "attested_keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",
      "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Key Types {#keyattestation-keytypes}

This specification defines the following values for `key_type`:

* `software`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses software-based key management.
* `tee`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Trusted Execution Environment for key management.
* `secure_enclave`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Secure Enclave for key management.
* `strong_box`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Strongbox for key management.
* `secure_element`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses a Secure Element for key management.

> * `hsm`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM).

Reviewer 7: What about "cloud" secure area (where keys are managed on the server)?

Author: it was meant by hsm. Would it fit better to include "remote_hsm", or would you intend to have remote software key storage?

Reviewer 7: I am interested in being able to express this scenario: private keys are encrypted on the server by the key stored in server-side HSM. Access to the server is controlled by user-entered PIN and a key stored in something like TEE on the device. I imagine there could be other designs. "hsm" does not sound right, as in this case it is probably server access which is the weakest link. Ultimately, I would just like to have enough language in the spec, so that it is possible to pick the right value for this scenario, so that there is no confusion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `hsm`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM).
* `remote_hsm`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM) that is not directly connected to the Wallet.
```

## User Authentication Types {#keyattestation-auth}

This specification defines the following values for `user_authentication`:

* `system_biometry`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the operating system using a biometric factor, such as the one provided by mobile devices.
* `system_pin`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the mobile operating system using personal identification number (PIN).
* `internal_biometry`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the Wallet using a biometric factor.
* `internal_pin`: It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the Wallet using PIN.

> * `secure_element_pin` It MUST be used when the key usage is authorized by the secure element managing the key itself using PIN.

Reviewer 11: Where does a (Cloud) HSM PIN fit in here?

Author: fair point, what do you think about "remote_pin" ?

Reviewer 2: I would change this section to only talk about user authentication and not combine it with different storage type. We should differentiate between different types of authentication like `pin`, `biometry` etc and where in the overarching system you authenticate: directly at the key storage or with the system.

For this specific section, it should not matter if you authenticate with the system and the system does a secure call to a cloud HSM or an internal one imho. That part should become clear from the key_type.

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

> A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides to the Issuer, the evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific attestations).

Author: ```suggestion
A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides to the Issuer, the evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific key attestations).
```

The JWT is signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself and contains the following elements:

* in the JOSE header,
  * `alg`: REQUIRED. A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry [@IANA.JOSE.ALGS]. It MUST NOT be `none` or an identifier for a symmetric algorithm (MAC).
  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `keyattestation+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].

The key attestation may use `x5c`, `kid` or `trust_chain` (as defined in (#jwt-proof-type) ) to convey the public key and the associated trust mechanism to sign the key attestation.

* in the JWT body,
  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `exp`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation and the key(s) it is attesting expire, using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys from the same key storage component using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].

>   * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the key storage component and its security mechanism of attested keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).

Author: ```suggestion
  * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the key storage component and its security mechanism of attested keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).
```

  * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the security mechanism the key storage component uses to authenticate the End-User to authorize access to the private key from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).

>   * `apr` : OPTIONAL. String that asserts the resistance to a specified attack potential. The value contains an URN that identifies the given attack potential.

Author: ```suggestion
  * `apr` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert attested resistance to specified attack potentials for the given keys. The string values contain URNs that identify the given attack potentials.
```

  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to proof that a key attestation was freshly generated.
  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [status list]

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

This is an example of a Key Attestation:

```json
{
  "typ": "keyattestation+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": "1"
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_type": "strong_box",

>   "user_authentication": "system_pin",

Author: ```suggestion
  "user_authentication": [ "system_pin" ],
```

>   "apr" : "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high",

Author: ```suggestion
  "apr" : [ "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high" ],
```

  "attested_keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",
      "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Key Types {#keyattestation-keytypes}

This specification defines the following values for `key_type`:

> * `software`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses software-based key management.
> * `tee`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Trusted Execution Environment for key management.
> * `secure_enclave`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Secure Enclave for key management.
> * `strong_box`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses the Strongbox for key management.
> * `secure_element`: It SHOULD be used when the Wallet uses a Secure Element for key management.

Author: ```suggestion
* `software`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses software-based key management.
* `tee`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses the Trusted Execution Environment for key management.
* `secure_enclave`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses the Secure Enclave for key management.
* `strong_box`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses the Strongbox for key management.
* `secure_element`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses a Secure Element for key management.
```

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

This is an example of a Key Attestation:

```json
{
  "typ": "keyattestation+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": "1"
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_type": "strong_box",
  "user_authentication": [ "system_pin" ],
  "apr" : [ "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high" ],
  "attested_keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",
      "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Key Types {#keyattestation-keytypes}

This specification defines the following values for `key_type`:

* `software`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses software-based key management.
* `tee`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses the Trusted Execution Environment for key management.
* `secure_enclave`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses the Secure Enclave for key management.
* `strong_box`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses the Strongbox for key management.

> * `secure_element`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses a Secure Element for key management.

Author: ```suggestion
* `secure_element`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses a Secure Element for key management.
* `external`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses a local external hardware token for key management.
```

> * `hsm`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM).
> * `remote_hsm`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM) that is not directly connected to the Wallet.

Author: ```suggestion
* `hsm`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM) for key management.
* `remote_hsm`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM) that is not directly connected to the Wallet for key management.
```

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

> A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides to the Issuer, the evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific key attestations).

Reviewer 12: `Issuer` on its own is not a defined term in this spec.

```suggestion
A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides to the Credential Issuer, the evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific key attestations).
```

Author: it actually is: `Credential Issuer (or Issuer):`

> A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys, e.g. for proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, based on the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. An Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.

Reviewer 12: Same as above. `Issuer` on its own is not a defined term in this spec.

```suggestion
A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys, e.g. for proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, based on the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. A Credential Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.
```

> Since the key attestations may have large audience as many Credential Issuers that not necessarly uses the same trust framework or internal design decisions, it is required to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format,allowing Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats makes easy for Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions, they also facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.

Reviewer 12: Typos and using defined terms.

```suggestion
Since the key attestations may have large audience as many Credential Issuers that not necessarily uses the same trust framework or internal design decisions, it is required to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format, allowing Credential Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats makes easy for Credential Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions, they also facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.
```

There are two flows how key attestations can be used within Credential issuance:
- The Wallet uses the `jwt` proof type in the Credential Request to create a proof of possession of the key and adds the key attestation in the JOSE header as specified in (#jwt-proof-type).
- The Wallet uses the `attestation` proof type in the Credential Request with the key attestation without a proof of possession of the key itself as specified in (#attestation-proof-type).

> The latter may avoid unnecessary user interaction during the Credential issuance, as the key itself is not performing a signature operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The latter may avoid unnecessary user interaction during the Credential issuance, as the key itself is not performing a signature operation.

```

## Key Attestation in JWT format {#keyattestation-jwt}

The JWT is signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself and contains the following elements:

* in the JOSE header,
  * `alg`: REQUIRED. A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry [@IANA.JOSE.ALGS]. It MUST NOT be `none` or an identifier for a symmetric algorithm (MAC).
  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `keyattestation+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].

The key attestation may use `x5c`, `kid` or `trust_chain` (as defined in (#jwt-proof-type) ) to convey the public key and the associated trust mechanism to sign the key attestation.

* in the JWT body,
  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].

>   * `exp`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation and the key(s) it is attesting expire, using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].

Reviewer: in JWT proof type, we only defined iat, and did not define exp, because we said it is up to the issuer's policy to decide how long to accept the proofs. why do we need exp here?

Author: the assurances about a key storage component and its keys usually have an expiration, see recommendations from BSI and NIST

Reviewer 2: Yeah I would agree this is a bit different: The key attestation might not come from the wallet directly, but a third party (the wallet provider). The wallet provider should be able to signal (via expiration) how long such an expiration should be deemed valid..
I am wondering if there are there cases where we think it should be optional instead of required?

Author: ok to resolve?

Reviewer: i think it makes sense for pre-generated key attestations in jwt proof type - it can also be a signal when a wallet needs to ask wallet backend to re-generate the key attestation. but i think it makes less sense in key attestations in attestation proof type, that are generated fresh, with issuer-provided nonce.

Author: Thinking with security-by-design I would like to let everything expire

Reviewer 3: Maybe make it OPTIONAL?

There is a `status` claim defined below so I guess the attestation generated by the Wallet Provider could be revocable if it is meant to be long lived or it could use the `exp` otherwise to limit the lifetime of the attestation.

Reviewer: yes!

Reviewer 3: I am not opposing but just for my curiosity why does it have to be a MUST for the attestation proof type, is it considered more sensitive?

  * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys from the same key storage component using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].

>   * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the key storage component and its security mechanism of attested keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the security mechanism of all of the keys being attested in the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).
```
probably better to make it clear that the same mechanism is used for all of the attested keys, right?

was also trying to simplify "the key storage component and its security mechanism"...

Author: I would rather:
```suggestion
  * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the key storage component of the attested keys in the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).
```

>   * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that asserts the security mechanisms the key storage component allows to authenticate the End-User to authorize access to the private key from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).

Author: ```suggestion
  * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that asserts the allowed authentication methods to access the private key from `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).
```

>   * `apr` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert attested resistance to specified attack potentials for the given keys. The string values contain URNs that identify the given attack potentials.

Author: ISO/IEC 18045 is the most common way, we could have the initial values from the spec

>   * `apr` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert attested resistance to specified attack potentials for the given keys. The string values contain URNs that identify the given attack potentials.

Reviewer: that is not a freely available standard, and i would expect a push back relying on it? but if that is a starting point, pointing to it as a place where to find URNs would be kind.

but what does this claim name even stand for..?

>   * `apr` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert attested resistance to specified attack potentials for the given keys. The string values contain URNs that identify the given attack potentials.

Reviewer 2: attack potential resistance - from my understanding it's basically a more refined way to define what level of security a system can achieve and what attack vectors it cannot prevent

>   * `apr` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert attested resistance to specified attack potentials for the given keys. The string values contain URNs that identify the given attack potentials.

Author: I've asked experts to provide initial values for this, hope to add some initial values or to improve the text within the next days.

>   * `apr` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert attested resistance to specified attack potentials for the given keys. The string values contain URNs that identify the given attack potentials.

Reviewer: I am ok opening a separate issue #409 and do this in another PR.

  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to proof that a key attestation was freshly generated.

>   * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [status list]

Reviewer 12: incorrect reference? Should probably be `[@!I-D.draft-ietf-oauth-status-list]`

```suggestion
  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [@!I-D.draft-ietf-oauth-status-list]
```

Author: thanks!

>   * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [@!I-D.draft-ietf-oauth-status-list]

Author: ```suggestion
  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-status-list]
```

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

This is an example of a Key Attestation:

```json
{
  "typ": "keyattestation+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": "1"
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_type": "strong_box",

>   "user_authentication": [ "system_pin" ],

Author: ```suggestion
  "user_authentication": [ "system_pin", "system_biometry" ],
```

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

> A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides to the Credential Issuer, the evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific key attestations).

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component to the Credential Issuer. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific key attestations).
```

A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys, e.g. for proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, based on the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. A Credential Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.

> Since the key attestations may have large audience as many Credential Issuers that not necessarily uses the same trust framework or internal design decisions, it is required to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format, allowing Credential Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats makes easy for Credential Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions, they also facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Since key attestations may be used for different Credential Issuers from different trust frameworks and varying in their requirements, it is necessary to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format, allowing Credential Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats makes easy for Credential Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions, they also facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.
```

Reviewer 13: This is a lot of informative text. You will need to get some more BCP14 keywords back into this or elsewhere to enable interoperability.

> There are two flows how key attestations can be used within Credential issuance:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
There are two ways to convey key attestations during Credential issuance:
```

## Key Attestation in JWT format {#keyattestation-jwt}

The JWT is signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself and contains the following elements:

* in the JOSE header,
  * `alg`: REQUIRED. A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry [@IANA.JOSE.ALGS]. It MUST NOT be `none` or an identifier for a symmetric algorithm (MAC).
  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `keyattestation+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].

The key attestation may use `x5c`, `kid` or `trust_chain` (as defined in (#jwt-proof-type) ) to convey the public key and the associated trust mechanism to sign the key attestation.

* in the JWT body,
  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `exp`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation and the key(s) it is attesting expire, using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].

>   * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys from the same key storage component using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].

Reviewer 8: Wondering it this could be an JWKS (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7517.html#section-5) instead of directly an array if JWK. Having an object here is an extra indirection however it is a standard representation and provides "extra space" to add more common properties to this set of keys.

Reviewer 8: Using JWKS would also allow a single top-level claims, with the extra properties being defined inside the JWKS (which allows for extensibility):
```json
"attested_keys" {
    "keys": [{"...":"..."}, {"...":"..."}],
    "key_type": "strong_box",
    "user_authentication": ["system_biometry", "system_pin"]
}
```

Reviewer 8: Thinking a bit more, a better design could be
```json
"attested_keys": {
    "keys": [{"...":"..."}, {"...":"..."}],
    "attestation": {
        "key_type": "strong_box",
        "user_authentication": ["system_biometry", "system_pin"],
        "a_future_extension": "with some value"
    }
}
```

- A *single* JWT claim registration - `attested_keys`
- A *single* JSON Web Key Set Parameter registeration - `attestation`.
- An extensible object with attestation information, including `key_type`, `user_authentication` and other future properties.

Reviewer 8: Shouldn't this model also allows for key derivation scenarios (e.g. Hierarchical 
Deterministic Keys), where instead of explicitly listing all the keys, the attestation contains some seed parameters for the key generation?

Reviewer: I like the proposal. JWKS make sense

Author: If attested_keys is a JWKS, I'd prefer:
```json
"attested_keys": {
    "keys": [{"...":"..."}, {"...":"..."}],
    "key_type": "strong_box",
    "user_authentication": ["system_biometry", "system_pin"],
    "a_future_extension": "with some value"
}
```

JWKS Parameters is an existing IANA Registry.

Reviewer 8: My reasoning is that this spec would contribute with a single parameter to the JWKS Parameters IANA register (e.g. `attestation`), which would be an object. The schema of this object and its extensibility would be own by this spec.

Author: Brian expresses concerns about registering these parameters to IANA

Reviewer 14: IMO, if `attested_keys` is defined to be a JWKS object as defined in RFC 7517, then it is probably necessary to register included parameters with IANA. Currently, there is only one parameter registered in the IANA JWKS registry which is `keys`. To avoid name clashes, these additional ones have to be registered there as well.

On the other hand, if we would just not define `attested_keys` as a JWKS but instead fully define it which would also require defining `keys`, then no IANA registration is needed.

Author: I think we should first figure out which of these additional attributes we want to keep and then revisit this discussion

Author: I tend to leave this as top-level claims, but I would leave it to working group decision

Reviewer: discussed in a WG call and reached a rough consensus that we will start with the current structure of array of jwks complying objects.

  * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the key storage component and its security mechanism of attested keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).

>   * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that asserts the security mechanisms the key storage component allows to authenticate the End-User to authorize access to the private key from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).

Reviewer 7: One additional thing that Android native key attestation contains is the timeout that a user_authentication remains valid. If the timeout is 0, user is required to authenticate for every key usage. Values greater than zero mean that a single user authentication allows key usage for the given number of seconds.

Reviewer 2: > One additional thing that Android native key attestation contains is the timeout that a user authentication remains valid. If the timeout is 0, user is required to authenticate for every key usage. Values greater than zero mean that a single user authentication allows key usage for the given number of seconds.

That sounds like an important detail to include in an attestation, but I wonder if there is a good way to abstract this into something that can also be used to express other things around user authentication. Basically something to convey the policies used for user_authentication?

We are not mentioning it right now, but there is also a big difference between allowing any fingerprint enrolled on a device (which would allow sharing) or a specific fingerprint (bound to a specific user).

>   * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that asserts the security mechanisms the key storage component allows to authenticate the End-User to authorize access to the private key from `keys`. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).

Reviewer 8: Since `user_authentication` is an array, we need to define how the elements compose. E.g. if the array contains `method-1` and `method-2`, does this mean that user authentication can be performed:
- using `method-1` *or* `method-2`.
- requiring both `method-1` *and* `method-2` (e.g. biometric followed by PIN).
I presume the intent is to have it be a disjunction but that isn't clear from the text.

Reviewer 2: We thought about it as an OR right now and adding new values for combinations like fingerprint AND pin. I think it would make sense to keep this rather simple for the first iteration and try to avoid more complex things like boolean operators.

  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to proof that a key attestation was freshly generated.
  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-status-list]

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

This is an example of a Key Attestation:

```json
{
  "typ": "keyattestation+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": "1"
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_type": "strong_box",
  "user_authentication": [ "system_pin", "system_biometry" ],
  "apr" : [ "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high" ],
  "attested_keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",
      "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Key Types {#keyattestation-keytypes}

This specification defines the following values for `key_type`:

> 

Reviewer 8: Without any further information or references, I believe it is almost impossible for a reader to know what `Trusted Execution Environment` or `Secure Element` mean. If they are supposed to refer to Android and iOS concepts, should we include explicit references or description.

If the OpenID4VCI spec defines these identifiers then it also need to define its meaning in a usable way.

Reviewer: agree, references are needed.

Reviewer 2: The best reference I was able to find was section 3.3 of  ISO 27071 (https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/en/#iso:std:iso-iec:27071:ed-1:v1:en) for the general descriptions and then reference ios (secure enclace) and android (strong box) directly?

Reviewer 2: I would say both secure enclave and strong box are subtypes of a secure element.
In general I would say, a secure element is a security chip/component that provides a secure platform that is capable of securely running applications and storing its confidential data (keys etc).

Author: Secure Elements usually refers to Common Criteria certified chips that use ISO7816 or ISO14443 from the smartcard industry.

I see that we would use some references and further explanations for the key types

Reviewer: i think there were specs for TEE in their own standards body, right?

Reviewer 14: I know this is a rabbit hole but to be even more specific, Secure Elements themselves can also comply to different Common Criteria protection profiles which means they can have different characteristics, i.e., not all of them are equally secure.

Author: @awoie that's correct. That's why the `apr` claim is actually the most interesting one, but for some this is hard to measure and some people will not have the security background to know what it actually means, that's why I put key_storage_type and user_authentication as a more approachable/easy way to describe the key storage component

  * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys from the same key storage component using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].
  * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the key storage component of the keys attested in the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).
  * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert the authentication methods allowed to access the private keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).
  * `apr` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert attested resistance to specified attack potentials for the given keys. The string values contain URNs that identify the given attack potentials.
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to proof that a key attestation was freshly generated.
  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-status-list]

> The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

Reviewer 4: Is this object also used for proof type "attestation"? If so, this statement should be conditional.

Author: I think you are correct. @c2bo did you add this text?

Reviewer 2: This is from from your initial commit, but it seems I forgot to change it when introducing the second proof type. We should move this into the jwt proof type text imho.

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component to the Credential Issuer. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific key attestations).

> A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys, e.g. for proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, based on the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. A Credential Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.

Reviewer 3: Given that https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/389/files#diff-1f424614b35a9899813079f1b1f6218631a2aedd993368ccb89bb81a9eda0289R1308 says

 > If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent.
 
 Is this sentence here valid
 
 > A Credential Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.
 
 It reads to me that a Credential issuer can decide to require attestations but not put it in the metadata.

Author: Do you mean SHOULD -> MAY ?

Author: Justto clarify key attestations are completly optional, but if an Issuer wants them, the typical way in OAuth is to include the needs in the metadata, therefore we added such entries to the Credential Issuer metadata

Reviewer 3: > Do you mean SHOULD -> MAY ?

I am not qualified to have this conversations. :) I will try to explain In layman's terms, the way I read this

The issuer medatada section says:

> If the Credential Issuer does not expect a key attestation, this object is absent.

So my expectation here would be that if I read the metadata, don't find this object, i don't send an attestation as it is not required/expected -- but I think my expectation would be wrong because there is this sentence:

> A Credential Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.

This one reads, for me at least, like _"Issuer may choose to require the attestation but the exact way this requirement is communicated is not enforced"_ i.e. if I go to metadata and see that there is no `key_attestations_required` it could just mean that this expectation/requirement is defined elsewhere (other metadata, or using the mentioned out-of-band mechanisms like policy or interop profile).

I would potentially just remove the sentence I mentioned above from the issuer metadata section and add a link to the attestation section where one can read that this object can be used to advertise attestation requirement but that the usage of this filed is not mandated for such a purpose and that one needs to consult the issuer's/ecosystem's documentation on whether the wallet must include it or not.

> Since key attestations may be used for different Credential Issuers from different trust frameworks and varying in their requirements, it is necessary to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format, allowing Credential Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats make it easy for Credential Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions and facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.

Reviewer 14: Should OID4VCI also say something about how these key attestations might relate to encryption? We had the discussion in the past that the encryption is not adding a lot on top of TLS because the wallet keys are not trusted necessarily. If the key attestations would also contain keys the wallet provides for encryption, wouldn't this solve this specific problem we had with encryption?

Author: I like the idea in general, but I think the keys from the wallet attestation (attestation-based client authenticaiton) may be a better fit, as the wallet attestation generates trust in who the wallet is, key attestation only says this is some valid key from hardware

Reviewer: Let's continue the discussion here https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/issues/406

> There are two ways to convey key attestations during Credential issuance:

Reviewer 14: Wouldn't it make sense to allow to convey the key attestations also in the in the Pushed Authorization and/or Token Request, i.e., using OAuth2 attestation-based client authentication? This way, the AS could also make a decision if they want to issue an access/refresh token to the wallet? Or is this mechanism out of scope of OID4VCI and possible because it uses the OAuth2 client authentication extension mechanism?

Reviewer 14: If it is out of scope, perhaps adding a note would still make sense?

Author: I would say in an ideal world, key attestations would be its own draft and could be applied to OpenID4VCI credential request and attestation-based client authentication. If you would want it for access/refresh tokens, it would only require to add `attestation` claim to the DPoP proof, which I also proposed (see checklist in PR description).

Reviewer: @awoie could you please open a new issue on this?

The JWT is signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself and contains the following elements:

* in the JOSE header,
  * `alg`: REQUIRED. A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry [@IANA.JOSE.ALGS]. It MUST NOT be `none` or an identifier for a symmetric algorithm (MAC).
  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `keyattestation+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].

The key attestation may use `x5c`, `kid` or `trust_chain` (as defined in (#jwt-proof-type) ) to convey the public key and the associated trust mechanism to sign the key attestation.

* in the JWT body,
  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `exp`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation and the key(s) it is attesting expire, using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys from the same key storage component using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].

>   * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the key storage component of the keys attested in the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).

Author: Editors Call:
- Mike says key_type is kind of used in JWK land, try to rename

>   * `key_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the key storage component of the keys attested in the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).

Reviewer 14: Perhaps `key_storage_type` is the better term?
```suggestion
  * `key_storage_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the key storage component of the keys attested in the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).
```

>   * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert the authentication methods allowed to access the private keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).

Reviewer 14: Are the methods defined in user_authentication evaluated as OR or AND? If they are OR, then how would you encode MFA?

Author: It was meant as logical OR, does this text fit better or do you have better words?
```suggestion
  * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert the authentication methods allowed to access the private keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. The values given it this array are interpreted as a logical OR. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).
```

Reviewer 14: I'm not sure if this would meet NIST 2FA requirements for all listed cases since both factors have to be independent, i.e., especially not sure if the key is stored by the app and the device biometrics to unlock the same app are used would meet the 2FA requirement.

However, I'm fine with the suggested text to resolve this issue.

  * `apr` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert attested resistance to specified attack potentials for the given keys. The string values contain URNs that identify the given attack potentials.

>   * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to proof that a key attestation was freshly generated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to prove that a key attestation was freshly generated.
```

  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-status-list]

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

This is an example of a Key Attestation:

```json
{
  "typ": "keyattestation+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",

>   "kid": "1"

Reviewer 3: Sorry for a dumb question, but is this example complete as I am not sure I understand what the `kid` is referring to.

>   "kid": "1"

Reviewer 3: Stupid comment, but this `kid` is a bit confusing for me here in this form.

Reviewer 2: This jwt would be signed by the Wallet Backend or the key storage directly - it cannot be referring to a key from the attestation. But it might make sense to change it to x5c for the example to avoid confusion?
```suggestion
  "x5c": ["MIIDQjCCA..."]
```

Reviewer 3: Would just point out this thing if it makes sense.

https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#section-8.2-2.3.1 says:

> Object providing a single proof of possession of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instance will be bound to...

Not sure if this will be in conflict because now credentials are not then bound to the key doing the proof or possession

Reviewer 2: Good catch! We probably need to adapt those lines describing proofs and proof a bit. We still get a proof that the wallet is in possession of the key(s), it just doesn't have to be a proof of possession.

}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,

>   "key_type": "strong_box",

Author: ```suggestion
  "key_storage_type": "strong_box",
```

  "user_authentication": [ "system_pin", "system_biometry" ],
  "apr" : [ "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high" ],
  "attested_keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",
      "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Key Types {#keyattestation-keytypes}

> This specification defines the following values for `key_type`:

Author: ```suggestion
This specification defines the following values for `key_storage_type`:
```

* `software`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses software-based key management.
* `tee`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses the Trusted Execution Environment for key management.
* `secure_enclave`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses the Secure Enclave for key management.
* `strong_box`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses the Strongbox for key management.
* `secure_element`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses a Secure Element for key management.
* `external`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses a local external hardware token for key management.
* `hsm`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM) for key management.
* `remote_hsm`: It MUST be used when the Wallet uses Hardware Security Module (HSM) that is not directly connected to the Wallet for key management.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Specifications that extend this list MUST choose collision-resistant values.

```

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

A key attestation, as defined by this specification, is a verifiable statement that demonstrates the authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component to the Credential Issuer. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which vary in their ability to protect the private key from extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for User authentication to enable key operations. These key storage components can be software-based or hardware-based and may reside on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that facilitate cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued either by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it MUST verify the authenticity of its claims about the keys, possibly using platform-specific key attestations.

> A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the cryptographic public keys, such as those used in proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers SHOULD evaluate these key attestations to ensure the keys meet their security requirements, based on the trust framework, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal policies. A Credential Issuer MUST communicate the need to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or via an out-of-band mechanism.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the cryptographic public keys, such as those used in proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers SHOULD evaluate these key attestations to ensure the cryptographic keys meet their security requirements, based on the trust framework, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal policies. A Credential Issuer MUST communicate the need to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or via an out-of-band mechanism.
```

Key attestations are used by various Credential Issuers with different trust frameworks and requirements, so a common approach is needed for interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD follow a common format. This helps Credential Issuers create consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and errors. Common formats also simplify compliance with regulatory requirements across jurisdictions and support the creation of shared best practices and security standards.

There are two ways to convey key attestations during Credential issuance:
- The Wallet uses the `jwt` proof type in the Credential Request to create a proof of possession of the key and adds the key attestation in the JOSE header as specified in (#jwt-proof-type).

> - The Wallet uses the `attestation` proof type in the Credential Request with the key attestation without a proof of possession of the key itself as specified in (#attestation-proof-type).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Wallet uses the `attestation` proof type in the Credential Request with the key attestation without a signature by key(s) themselves as specified in (#attestation-proof-type).
```

> - The Wallet uses the `attestation` proof type in the Credential Request with the key attestation without a proof of possession of the key itself as specified in (#attestation-proof-type).

Author: todo: move this part to the proof type section

> The latter may avoid unnecessary End-User interaction during the Credential issuance, as the key itself is not performing a signature operation.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Depending on the Wallet's implementation, the `attestation` may avoid unnecessary End-User interaction during Credential issuance, as the key itself does not necessarily need to perform signature operations.
```

* in the JOSE header,
  * `alg`: REQUIRED. A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry [@IANA.JOSE]. It MUST NOT be `none` or an identifier for a symmetric algorithm (MAC).
  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `keyattestation+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].

The key attestation may use `x5c`, `kid` or `trust_chain` (as defined in (#jwt-proof-type) ) to convey the public key and the associated trust mechanism to sign the key attestation.

* in the JWT body,
  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `exp`: OPTIONAL (number). Integer for the time at which the key attestation and the key(s) it is attesting expire, using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519]. MUST be present if the attestation is used with the JWT proof type.
  * `attested_keys` : REQUIRED. Array of attested keys from the same key storage component using the syntax of JWK as defined in [@!RFC7517].

>   * `key_storage_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the attack potential resistance of the key storage component and its keys attested in the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-apr).

Author: ```suggestion
  * `key_storage_type` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert the attack potential resistance of the key storage component and its keys attested in the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-apr).
```

>   * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert the attack potential resistance of the user authentication methods allowed to access the private keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-apr).

Author: great points Pedro, will apply them

  * `certification` : OPTIONAL. A String that contains a URL that links to the certification of the key storage component.
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to prove that a key attestation was freshly generated.
  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-status-list]

If used with the `jwt` proof type, the Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is signed by a key contained in the attestation in the JOSE Header.

This is an example of a Key Attestation:

```json
{
  "typ": "keyattestation+jwt",
  "alg": "ES256",
  "x5c": ["MIIDQjCCA..."]
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",

>   "iat": 1516247022,

Author: Andrea Rock proposes an identifier for the key storage component/WSCD, if there is more than one in the wallet

Reviewer 6: is this identifier signed?

I suppose that we don't have privacy issues in giving the proof of the wscd vendor to the issuer, or do we have?

Reviewer 15: Isn't that an information that we could get from the key attestation certificate from the key storage/WSCD, if necessary?

I would expect a wallet to already have an internal mapping with identifiers between key attestation jwts and the location where the key resides.

Reviewer: opened #418

  "exp": 1541493724,

>   "key_storage_type": [ "iso_18045_moderate" ],

Author: ```suggestion
  "key_storage": [ "iso_18045_moderate" ],
```

  "user_authentication": [ "iso_18045_moderate" ],
  "attested_keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",
      "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Attack Potential Resistance {#keyattestation-apr}

This specification defines the following values for `key_storage` and `user_authentication`:

* `iso_18045_high`: It MUST be used when key storage or user authentication is resistent to attack with attack potential "High", equivalent to VAN.5 according to ISO 18045.
* `iso_18045_moderate`: It MUST be used when key storage or user authentication is resistent to attack with attack potential "Moderate", equivalent to VAN.4 according to ISO 18045.
* `iso_18045_enhanced-basic`: It MUST be used when key storage or user authentication is resistent to attack with attack potential "Enhanced-Basic", equivalent to VAN.3 according to ISO 18045.
* `iso_18045_basic`: It MUST be used when key storage or user authentication is resistent to attack with attack potential "Basic", equivalent to VAN.2 according to ISO 18045.

Specifications that extend this list MUST choose collision-resistant values.

> Ecosystems may define their own values. If the value does not map to a well-known specification, it is RECOMMENDED that the value is a URL that gives further information about the attack potential resistance and possible relations to level of assurances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When ISO 18045 is not used, ecosystems may define their own values. If the value does not map to a well-known specification, it is RECOMMENDED that the value is a URL that gives further information about the attack potential resistance and possible relations to level of assurances.
```
suggested during the WG call

> When ISO 18045 is not used, ecosystems may define their own values. If the value does not map to a well-known specification, it is RECOMMENDED that the value is a URL that gives further information about the attack potential resistance and possible relations to level of assurances.

Reviewer 8: How can one know that `the value does not map to a well-known specification`? Some IETF specs (e.g. Web Linking and link relations) mandate that *any* non-standard value must be an URI (e.g. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8288.html#section-2.1.2). I suggest a similar approach here.

Author: so you mean RECOMMENDED -> MUST?

Reviewer 8: I'm suggesting that any identifier not defined in this spec SHOULD be an URI. Namely, remove the `When ISO 18045 is not used` and the `If the value does not map to a well-known specification`. 
I.e. mandate that the APR is either a value defined by this spec or an URI.

Reviewer: opened #416

<{{examples/credential_response_sd_jwt_vc.txt}}

# Key Attestations {#keyattestation}

> A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component to the Credential Issuer. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific key attestations).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component to the Credential Issuer. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to perform key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific key attestations).
```

> A key attestation defined by this specification is an interoperable, verifiable statement that provides evidence of authenticity and security properties of a key and its storage component to the Credential Issuer. Keys can be stored in various key storage components, which differ in their ability to protect the private key against extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for End-User authentication to unlock key operations. These key storage components may be software-based or hardware-based, and can be located on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that enable cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued by the Wallet's key storage component itself or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it needs to verify the authenticity of the claims it is making about the keys (e.g., by using the platform-specific key attestations).
> 
> A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys, e.g. for proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, based on the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. A Credential Issuer MUST communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A key attestation, as defined by this specification, is a verifiable statement that demonstrates the authenticity and security features of a key and its storage component to the Credential Issuer. Keys can be stored in various components, which vary in their ability to protect the private key from extraction and duplication, as well as in the methods used for User authentication to enable key operations. These storage components can be software-based or hardware-based and may reside on the same device as the Wallet, on external security tokens, or on remote services that facilitate cryptographic key operations. Key attestations are issued either by the Wallet's key storage component or by the Wallet Provider. When the Wallet Provider creates the key attestation, it MUST verify the authenticity of its claims about the keys, possibly using platform-specific key attestations.

A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the cryptographic public keys, such as those used in proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers SHOULD evaluate these key attestations to ensure the keys meet their security requirements, based on the trust framework, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal policies. A Credential Issuer MUST communicate the need to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or via an out-of-band mechanism.
```

Author: I made small changes to your proposal, especially I want to keep the term "key storage component", otherwise lgtm

> A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys, e.g. for proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, based on the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. A Credential Issuer SHOULD communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Wallet MAY provide key attestations to inform the Credential Issuer about the properties of the provided cryptographic public keys, e.g. for proof types sent in the Credential Request. Credential Issuers may want to evaluate these key attestations to determine whether the keys meet their own security requirements, based on the trust framework in use, regulatory requirements, laws, or internal design decisions. A Credential Issuer MUST communicate this requirement to evaluate key attestations through its metadata or using some sort of out-of-band mechanism.
```

> Since key attestations may be used for different Credential Issuers from different trust frameworks and varying in their requirements, it is necessary to use a common approach to facilitate interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD use a common format, allowing Credential Issuers to develop consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and potential errors. Common formats make it easy for Credential Issuers to demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements across different jurisdictions and facilitate the development of shared best practices and security benchmarks.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Key attestations are used by various Credential Issuers with different trust frameworks and requirements, so a common approach is needed for interoperability. Therefore, key attestations SHOULD follow a common format. This helps Credential Issuers create consistent evaluation processes, reducing complexity and errors. Common formats also simplify compliance with regulatory requirements across jurisdictions and support the creation of shared best practices and security standards.
```

It looks more like an implementation consideration, it would make sense moving in that section.

Author: lgtm, however I would keep it all together here

There are two ways to convey key attestations during Credential issuance:
- The Wallet uses the `jwt` proof type in the Credential Request to create a proof of possession of the key and adds the key attestation in the JOSE header as specified in (#jwt-proof-type).
- The Wallet uses the `attestation` proof type in the Credential Request with the key attestation without a proof of possession of the key itself as specified in (#attestation-proof-type).

> The latter may avoid unnecessary user interaction during the Credential issuance, as the key itself is not performing a signature operation.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The latter may avoid unnecessary User interaction during the Credential issuance, as the key itself is not performing a signature operation.
```

## Key Attestation in JWT format {#keyattestation-jwt}

The JWT is signed by the Wallet Provider or the Wallet's key storage component itself and contains the following elements:

* in the JOSE header,
  * `alg`: REQUIRED. A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry [@IANA.JOSE]. It MUST NOT be `none` or an identifier for a symmetric algorithm (MAC).

>   * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `keyattestation+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  * `typ`: REQUIRED. MUST be `wallet-key-attestation+jwt`, which explicitly types the key proof JWT as recommended in Section 3.11 of [@!RFC8725].
```

as suggested at IIW

Author: could you elaborate why?

  * `key_storage_type` : OPTIONAL. Case sensitive string that asserts the key storage component of the keys attested in the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-keytypes).
  * `user_authentication` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert the authentication methods allowed to access the private keys from the `attested_keys` parameter. This specification defines initial values in (#keyattestation-auth).
  * `apr` : OPTIONAL. Array of case sensitive strings that assert attested resistance to specified attack potentials for the given keys. The string values contain URNs that identify the given attack potentials.
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL. String that represents a nonce provided by the Issuer to prove that a key attestation was freshly generated.
  * `status`: OPTIONAL. JSON Object representing the supported revocation check mechanisms, such as the one defined in [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-status-list]

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

This is an example of a Key Attestation:

```json
{

>   "typ": "keyattestation+jwt",

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  "typ": "wallet-key-attestation+jwt",
```

may we use the name patter also used in other specs prepending "wallet"?

Author: What other specs? The typ values used in OpenID4VCI don't use that.

Author: @peppelinux why is this important to you? What other specs do you mean?

Reviewer 6: https://openid.github.io/oid4vc-haip-sd-jwt-vc/openid4vc-high-assurance-interoperability-profile-sd-jwt-vc-wg-draft.html#section-4.3.1-7

Author: The decision was to split up wallet and key attestation, so I think it doesn't make sense. The HAIP example is therefore somewhat deprecated

Reviewer 6: Okay, please don't consider my suggestion as a blocker for this review if the scope of the key attestation extends beyond wallet architectures. If it doesn't, it would be preferable to specialize the scope and context of the key attestation within the boundaries of wallet architectures.

  "alg": "ES256",
  "kid": "1"
}
.
{
  "iss": "<identifier of the issuer of this key attestation>",
  "iat": 1516247022,
  "exp": 1541493724,
  "key_storage_type": "strong_box",
  "user_authentication": [ "system_pin", "system_biometry" ],
  "apr" : [ "https://trust-list.eu/apr/high" ],
  "attested_keys": [
    {
      "kty": "EC",
      "crv": "P-256",
      "x": "TCAER19Zvu3OHF4j4W4vfSVoHIP1ILilDls7vCeGemc",

>       "y": "ZxjiWWbZMQGHVWKVQ4hbSIirsVfuecCE6t4jT9F2HZQ"

Reviewer 6: where the proof of association (POA) is made evident in this jwk?

Author: PoA is expected to be a different proof type (that may leverage the attestation)

   -14
   

>    * add key attestation as additional information in a proof of possesion and new proof type

Reviewer 3: should this go to 15, I think 14 has been already published

   -14
   

>    * add key attestation as additional information in a proof of possesion and new proof type

Reviewer 3: leaving this here just we don't forget to move this description to the current newest draft in which this will end up - 15 right now
